ai-resources/prompts/README.md, before:

---
title: "AI Prompts Library - Master Catalog"
author: "Dan Brickey"
last_updated: "2025-10-25"
version: "2.4.0"
category: "prompts-index"
tags: ["prompts", "AI-templates", "code-generation", "documentation", "architecture", "career"]
status: "current"
contents: ["architecture", "documentation", "meta", "career", "workflows", "specialized", "development", "strategy", "utilities"]
usage: "Centralized library of reusable prompt templates for consistent AI assistance across all domains"
---

# AI Prompts Library - Master Catalog

Welcome to the AI Prompts Library - a comprehensive collection of reusable prompt templates for AI assistance across career development, technical work, documentation, and personal productivity.

## 🔍 Mnemonic Quick Reference

Type `@` + mnemonic for fast autocomplete in Claude Code:

| Mnemonic | Prompt | Purpose |
|----------|--------|---------|
| **@meta-librarian** ⭐ | [Meta-Librarian Architect](meta/meta-librarian-architect.md) | **UNIFIED** (recommended): Create + assess + organize |
| **@meta** | [Meta-Prompt Engineer](meta/meta-prompt-engineer.md) | Prompt engineering only (focused) |
| **@librarian** | [Prompt Librarian](meta/librarian-prompt-management.md) | Library management only (focused) |
| **@architect** | [Data Architect](architecture/architect-data-vault.md) | Data architecture & modeling expert |
| **@arcdoc** | [Architecture Docs](documentation/arcdoc-documentation-architect.md) | Architecture documentation with business rules |
| **@bizrules** | [Business Rules](documentation/bizrules-documenter.md) | Document business rules from code |
| **@projdoc** | [Project Docs](documentation/projdoc-expert.md) | Create project documentation |
| **@meeting** | [Meeting Notes](documentation/meeting-notes-summarizer.md) | Summarize meetings to action items |
| **@drawio** | [Drawio Specialist](architecture/drawio-specialist.md) | Create/edit Draw.io diagrams |
| **@tutor** | [AI Tutor](specialized/tutor-learning-assistant.md) | Personalized learning & skill development |
| **@giftfinder** | [Gift Finder](utilities/giftfinder-shopping-assistant.md) | Gift shopping with recipient profiling & web search |

---

## 📂 Directory Structure

```
ai-resources/prompts/
├── architecture/          ← Architecture & technical design prompts
├── documentation/         ← Documentation generation & management prompts
├── meta/                  ← Prompt engineering & meta-prompts
├── career/                ← Career development & analysis prompts
├── workflows/             ← Multi-step workflow prompts
├── specialized/           ← Domain-specific utility prompts
├── development/           ← Software development & coding prompts
├── strategy/              ← Strategic planning & evaluation prompts
└── utilities/             ← Productivity & automation utilities
```

---

## 🏗️ Architecture Prompts

**Location**: [architecture/](architecture/)

Expert prompts for data architecture, technical design, and diagramming:

- **[@architect](architecture/architect-data-vault.md)** - Data architecture expert for Data Vault 2.0, dimensional modeling, and Snowflake platform design.
- **[@drawio](architecture/drawio-specialist.md)** - Specialist for creating and editing Draw.io diagrams for architecture documentation.
- **[technical-requirements/](architecture/technical-requirements/)** - Systematic approach to defining, documenting, and validating technical requirements for software projects.

---

## 📝 Documentation Prompts

**Location**: [documentation/](documentation/)

Prompts for generating and managing various types of documentation:

- **[@arcdoc](documentation/arcdoc-documentation-architect.md)** - Architecture documentation assistant with business rules integration. Interviews for missing details, processes braindumps, organizes documentation with multi-audience layering.
- **[@projdoc](documentation/projdoc-expert.md)** - Expert for creating comprehensive project documentation with proper structure and formatting.
- **[@bizrules](documentation/bizrules-documenter.md)** - Specialist for documenting business rules and domain logic in accessible formats.
- **[@meeting](documentation/meeting-notes-summarizer.md)** - Assistant for summarizing meeting notes into actionable items and key decisions.

---

## 🧠 Meta / Prompt Engineering

**Location**: [meta/](meta/)

Tools for creating and improving prompts themselves:

> 💡 **New to meta prompts?** Start with `@meta-librarian` - it does everything.
> Already have a prompt and just need to organize it? Use `@librarian` for simplicity.
> Want to experiment with just prompt creation? Use `@meta` for focused workflow.

### Primary Tool (Recommended)
- **[@meta-librarian](meta/meta-librarian-architect.md)** ⭐ - **UNIFIED SYSTEM**: Combines prompt engineering (systematic evaluation), agentic workflow assessment (when to use subagents), and library management (organization & discovery). **Most users want this.**

### Standalone Components (Focused Tools)
- **[@meta](meta/meta-prompt-engineer.md)** - Prompt engineering only: Creates high-quality prompts using systematic evaluation methodology with 3 candidates, rubric scoring, and evidence-based selection.
- **[@librarian](meta/librarian-prompt-management.md)** - Library management only: Organizes, categorizes, discovers, and maintains the prompt library with metadata enhancement.

### Supporting Resources
- **[prompting-pattern-library/](meta/prompting-pattern-library/)** - Comprehensive library of prompting patterns, techniques, and best practices (25+ patterns, failure modes, model quirks).
- **[agentic-development/](meta/agentic-development/)** - Expert guidance on building autonomous AI agents and agentic workflows ("Just Talk To It" methodology).
- **[data_vault_refactor_prompt_generator.md](meta/data_vault_refactor_prompt_generator.md)** - Generator for creating Data Vault refactoring prompts for specific tables/entities.

---

## 💼 Career Development Prompts

**Location**: [career/](career/)

Prompts for career planning, analysis, and development:

### Career Planning & Analysis
- **[career-analyzer.md](career/career-analyzer.md)** - Analyze career paths, create development plans, and identify skill gaps.
- **[career-cv-interviewer.md](career/career-cv-interviewer.md)** - Interview assistant for building comprehensive CV/resume content.

### AI Career Path Role Prompts
**Location**: [career/ai_career_paths/](career/ai_career_paths/)

Specialized role-specific prompts for exploring AI career paths:

#### Technical Roles
- [ai_prompt_engineer.md](career/ai_career_paths/ai_prompt_engineer.md)
- [ml_engineer.md](career/ai_career_paths/ml_engineer.md)
- [deep_learning_engineer.md](career/ai_career_paths/deep_learning_engineer.md)
- [ai_research_scientist.md](career/ai_career_paths/ai_research_scientist.md)
- [nlp_engineer.md](career/ai_career_paths/nlp_engineer.md)
- [computer_vision_engineer.md](career/ai_career_paths/computer_vision_engineer.md)

#### Business & Strategy Roles
- [ai_product_manager.md](career/ai_career_paths/ai_product_manager.md)
- [ai_strategist.md](career/ai_career_paths/ai_strategist.md)
- [ai_customer_success_manager.md](career/ai_career_paths/ai_customer_success_manager.md)

#### Governance & Compliance Roles
- [ai_ethics_officer.md](career/ai_career_paths/ai_ethics_officer.md)
- [ai_governance_specialist.md](career/ai_career_paths/ai_governance_specialist.md)
- [ai_compliance_manager.md](career/ai_career_paths/ai_compliance_manager.md)

#### Specialized Roles
- [ai_coach.md](career/ai_career_paths/ai_coach.md)
- [ai_content_creator.md](career/ai_career_paths/ai_content_creator.md)
- [ai_change_management_specialist.md](career/ai_career_paths/ai_change_management_specialist.md)
- [conversational_ai_ux_designer.md](career/ai_career_paths/conversational_ai_ux_designer.md)
- [data_annotator_ai_trainer.md](career/ai_career_paths/data_annotator_ai_trainer.md)

---

## 🔄 Workflows

**Location**: [workflows/](workflows/)

Multi-step workflow prompts for complex tasks:

### Slide Deck Workflow
**Location**: [workflows/slide_deck_workflow/](workflows/slide_deck_workflow/)

Four-step workflow for creating enterprise slide decks:
- [01_corporate_style_extractor.md](workflows/slide_deck_workflow/01_corporate_style_extractor.md) - Extract corporate style from existing presentations
- [02_corporate_style_applicator.md](workflows/slide_deck_workflow/02_corporate_style_applicator.md) - Apply extracted style to new content
- [03_enterprise_deck_architect.md](workflows/slide_deck_workflow/03_enterprise_deck_architect.md) - Architect comprehensive slide deck structure
- [04_deck_assemply_and_validation.md](workflows/slide_deck_workflow/04_deck_assemply_and_validation.md) - Assemble and validate final deck

---

## 🎯 Specialized Prompts

**Location**: [specialized/](specialized/)

Domain-specific utility prompts:

- **[@tutor](specialized/tutor-learning-assistant.md)** - AI tutor for personalized learning and skill development.

---

## 💻 Development Prompts

**Location**: [development/](development/)

Software development and coding assistance prompts:

- **[vibe-coding/](development/vibe-coding/)** - Modern coding assistant focused on developer experience, clean code, and iterative development.

---

## 🎯 Strategy Prompts

**Location**: [strategy/](strategy/)

Strategic planning, evaluation, and decision-making prompts:

- **[ai-vendor-evaluation/](strategy/ai-vendor-evaluation/)** - Systematic framework for evaluating AI vendors, tools, and platforms with vendor-neutral analysis.

---

## 🛠️ Utilities

**Location**: [utilities/](utilities/)

Productivity tools and automation utilities:

- **[@giftfinder](utilities/giftfinder-shopping-assistant.md)** - Intelligent gift discovery assistant with recipient profiling, web search, and organized tracking for thoughtful gift-giving.
- **[excel-automation/](utilities/excel-automation/)** - Automate Excel spreadsheet creation, data manipulation, and formula generation.
- **[excel-editing/](utilities/excel-editing/)** - Expert assistance for editing existing Excel files, creating pivot tables, and advanced Excel features.

---

---

## 🚀 Usage Guidelines

### Using Prompts in Claude Code

Reference prompts using the @-mention syntax with mnemonics:
```
@architect help me design a data architecture
@tutor create a learning plan for Python
@giftfinder help me find a gift for my friend
```

Or reference the full path:
```
@ai-resources/prompts/documentation/arcdoc-documentation-architect.md review my docs
```

### Creating New Prompts

1. Use [@meta](meta/meta-prompt-engineer.md) to create high-quality prompts with systematic evaluation
2. Place prompts in the appropriate category folder
3. Update this README catalog when adding new prompts
4. Use consistent frontmatter with title, author, version, tags

### Prompt Maintenance

- **Versioning**: Update version numbers in frontmatter when making significant changes
- **Documentation**: Keep this README updated with new prompts
- **Organization**: Keep prompts organized by category for easy discovery

---

## 📊 Quick Reference

| Category | Count | Use Case |
|----------|-------|----------|
| Architecture | 3 | Technical design, Data Vault, diagrams, requirements |
| Documentation | 4 | Project docs, business rules, meeting notes |
| Meta | 6 | Prompt engineering, library management, patterns, agentic development, unified architect |
| Career | 20 | Career planning, AI roles, job search, resume building |
| Workflows | 4 | Multi-step processes (slide decks) |
| Specialized | 1 | Domain utilities (tutoring) |
| Development | 1 | Coding assistance, clean code practices |
| Strategy | 1 | Vendor evaluation, strategic planning |
| Utilities | 3 | Excel automation, gift shopping, productivity tools |
| **Total** | **43** | Centralized general-purpose prompts |

---

## 🔗 Related Resources

- **Configuration**: [.ai/instructions.md](../../.ai/instructions.md) - Customize with your personal context
- **Additional Context**: [.ai/context.md](../../.ai/context.md) - Optional domain-specific context
- **Skills**: [ai-resources/skills/](../skills/) - Packaged skill files

---

*Last Updated: 2025-10-25 by Dan Brickey*
*Version v2.4.0: Added unified @meta-librarian architect combining prompt engineering, agentic assessment, and library management*

Commit message:

Refactor README.md to update version to 2.5.0 and add @nav Navigator prompt; update arcdoc-documentation-architect.md for index maintenance; enhance meta-librarian-architect.md with prompt registration workflow; revise giftfinder-shopping-assistant.md for profile index references; create documentation-index.md and taxonomy.md for structured documentation navigation and classification.

ai-resources/prompts/README.md, after:

---
title: "AI Prompts Library - Master Catalog"
author: "Dan Brickey"
last_updated: "2025-10-25"
version: "2.5.0"
category: "prompts-index"
tags: ["prompts", "AI-templates", "code-generation", "documentation", "architecture", "career"]
status: "current"
contents: ["architecture", "documentation", "meta", "career", "workflows", "specialized", "development", "strategy", "utilities"]
usage: "Centralized library of reusable prompt templates for consistent AI assistance across all domains"
---

# AI Prompts Library - Master Catalog

Welcome to the AI Prompts Library - a comprehensive collection of reusable prompt templates for AI assistance across career development, technical work, documentation, and personal productivity.

## 🔍 Mnemonic Quick Reference

Type `@` + mnemonic for fast autocomplete in Claude Code:

| Mnemonic | Prompt | Purpose |
|----------|--------|---------|
| **@nav** 🧭 | [Navigator](meta/nav-resource-navigator.md) | **START HERE**: Route to right prompts/docs/workflows |
| **@meta-librarian** ⭐ | [Meta-Librarian Architect](meta/meta-librarian-architect.md) | **UNIFIED** (recommended): Create + assess + organize |
| **@meta** | [Meta-Prompt Engineer](meta/meta-prompt-engineer.md) | Prompt engineering only (focused) |
| **@librarian** | [Prompt Librarian](meta/librarian-prompt-management.md) | Library management only (focused) |
| **@architect** | [Data Architect](architecture/architect-data-vault.md) | Data architecture & modeling expert |
| **@arcdoc** | [Architecture Docs](documentation/arcdoc-documentation-architect.md) | Architecture documentation with business rules |
| **@bizrules** | [Business Rules](documentation/bizrules-documenter.md) | Document business rules from code |
| **@projdoc** | [Project Docs](documentation/projdoc-expert.md) | Create project documentation |
| **@meeting** | [Meeting Notes](documentation/meeting-notes-summarizer.md) | Summarize meetings to action items |
| **@drawio** | [Drawio Specialist](architecture/drawio-specialist.md) | Create/edit Draw.io diagrams |
| **@tutor** | [AI Tutor](specialized/tutor-learning-assistant.md) | Personalized learning & skill development |
| **@giftfinder** | [Gift Finder](utilities/giftfinder-shopping-assistant.md) | Gift shopping with recipient profiling & web search |

---

## 📂 Directory Structure

```
ai-resources/prompts/
├── architecture/          ← Architecture & technical design prompts
├── documentation/         ← Documentation generation & management prompts
├── meta/                  ← Prompt engineering & meta-prompts
├── career/                ← Career development & analysis prompts
├── workflows/             ← Multi-step workflow prompts
├── specialized/           ← Domain-specific utility prompts
├── development/           ← Software development & coding prompts
├── strategy/              ← Strategic planning & evaluation prompts
└── utilities/             ← Productivity & automation utilities
```

---

## 🏗️ Architecture Prompts

**Location**: [architecture/](architecture/)

Expert prompts for data architecture, technical design, and diagramming:

- **[@architect](architecture/architect-data-vault.md)** - Data architecture expert for Data Vault 2.0, dimensional modeling, and Snowflake platform design.
- **[@drawio](architecture/drawio-specialist.md)** - Specialist for creating and editing Draw.io diagrams for architecture documentation.
- **[technical-requirements/](architecture/technical-requirements/)** - Systematic approach to defining, documenting, and validating technical requirements for software projects.

---

## 📝 Documentation Prompts

**Location**: [documentation/](documentation/)

Prompts for generating and managing various types of documentation:

- **[@arcdoc](documentation/arcdoc-documentation-architect.md)** - Architecture documentation assistant with business rules integration. Interviews for missing details, processes braindumps, organizes documentation with multi-audience layering.
- **[@projdoc](documentation/projdoc-expert.md)** - Expert for creating comprehensive project documentation with proper structure and formatting.
- **[@bizrules](documentation/bizrules-documenter.md)** - Specialist for documenting business rules and domain logic in accessible formats.
- **[@meeting](documentation/meeting-notes-summarizer.md)** - Assistant for summarizing meeting notes into actionable items and key decisions.

---

## 🧠 Meta / Prompt Engineering

**Location**: [meta/](meta/)

Tools for creating and improving prompts themselves:

> 💡 **New to meta prompts?** Start with `@meta-librarian` - it does everything.
> Already have a prompt and just need to organize it? Use `@librarian` for simplicity.
> Want to experiment with just prompt creation? Use `@meta` for focused workflow.

### Navigation & Orchestration
- **[@nav](meta/nav-resource-navigator.md)** 🧭 - **START HERE**: Intelligent routing assistant that knows the entire AI resources ecosystem. Directs you to the right prompts, docs, or workflows - and recommends creating new resources when gaps exist. **Use this when you're not sure which prompt to use.**

### Primary Tool (Recommended)
- **[@meta-librarian](meta/meta-librarian-architect.md)** ⭐ - **UNIFIED SYSTEM**: Combines prompt engineering (systematic evaluation), agentic workflow assessment (when to use subagents), and library management (organization & discovery). **Most users want this.**

### Standalone Components (Focused Tools)
- **[@meta](meta/meta-prompt-engineer.md)** - Prompt engineering only: Creates high-quality prompts using systematic evaluation methodology with 3 candidates, rubric scoring, and evidence-based selection.
- **[@librarian](meta/librarian-prompt-management.md)** - Library management only: Organizes, categorizes, discovers, and maintains the prompt library with metadata enhancement.

### Supporting Resources
- **[prompting-pattern-library/](meta/prompting-pattern-library/)** - Comprehensive library of prompting patterns, techniques, and best practices (25+ patterns, failure modes, model quirks).
- **[agentic-development/](meta/agentic-development/)** - Expert guidance on building autonomous AI agents and agentic workflows ("Just Talk To It" methodology).
- **[data_vault_refactor_prompt_generator.md](meta/data_vault_refactor_prompt_generator.md)** - Generator for creating Data Vault refactoring prompts for specific tables/entities.

---

## 💼 Career Development Prompts

**Location**: [career/](career/)

Prompts for career planning, analysis, and development:

### Career Planning & Analysis
- **[career-analyzer.md](career/career-analyzer.md)** - Analyze career paths, create development plans, and identify skill gaps.
- **[career-cv-interviewer.md](career/career-cv-interviewer.md)** - Interview assistant for building comprehensive CV/resume content.

### AI Career Path Role Prompts
**Location**: [career/ai_career_paths/](career/ai_career_paths/)

Specialized role-specific prompts for exploring AI career paths:

#### Technical Roles
- [ai_prompt_engineer.md](career/ai_career_paths/ai_prompt_engineer.md)
- [ml_engineer.md](career/ai_career_paths/ml_engineer.md)
- [deep_learning_engineer.md](career/ai_career_paths/deep_learning_engineer.md)
- [ai_research_scientist.md](career/ai_career_paths/ai_research_scientist.md)
- [nlp_engineer.md](career/ai_career_paths/nlp_engineer.md)
- [computer_vision_engineer.md](career/ai_career_paths/computer_vision_engineer.md)

#### Business & Strategy Roles
- [ai_product_manager.md](career/ai_career_paths/ai_product_manager.md)
- [ai_strategist.md](career/ai_career_paths/ai_strategist.md)
- [ai_customer_success_manager.md](career/ai_career_paths/ai_customer_success_manager.md)

#### Governance & Compliance Roles
- [ai_ethics_officer.md](career/ai_career_paths/ai_ethics_officer.md)
- [ai_governance_specialist.md](career/ai_career_paths/ai_governance_specialist.md)
- [ai_compliance_manager.md](career/ai_career_paths/ai_compliance_manager.md)

#### Specialized Roles
- [ai_coach.md](career/ai_career_paths/ai_coach.md)
- [ai_content_creator.md](career/ai_career_paths/ai_content_creator.md)
- [ai_change_management_specialist.md](career/ai_career_paths/ai_change_management_specialist.md)
- [conversational_ai_ux_designer.md](career/ai_career_paths/conversational_ai_ux_designer.md)
- [data_annotator_ai_trainer.md](career/ai_career_paths/data_annotator_ai_trainer.md)

---

## 🔄 Workflows

**Location**: [workflows/](workflows/)

Multi-step workflow prompts for complex tasks:

### Slide Deck Workflow
**Location**: [workflows/slide_deck_workflow/](workflows/slide_deck_workflow/)

Four-step workflow for creating enterprise slide decks:
- [01_corporate_style_extractor.md](workflows/slide_deck_workflow/01_corporate_style_extractor.md) - Extract corporate style from existing presentations
- [02_corporate_style_applicator.md](workflows/slide_deck_workflow/02_corporate_style_applicator.md) - Apply extracted style to new content
- [03_enterprise_deck_architect.md](workflows/slide_deck_workflow/03_enterprise_deck_architect.md) - Architect comprehensive slide deck structure
- [04_deck_assemply_and_validation.md](workflows/slide_deck_workflow/04_deck_assemply_and_validation.md) - Assemble and validate final deck

---

## 🎯 Specialized Prompts

**Location**: [specialized/](specialized/)

Domain-specific utility prompts:

- **[@tutor](specialized/tutor-learning-assistant.md)** - AI tutor for personalized learning and skill development.

---

## 💻 Development Prompts

**Location**: [development/](development/)

Software development and coding assistance prompts:

- **[vibe-coding/](development/vibe-coding/)** - Modern coding assistant focused on developer experience, clean code, and iterative development.

---

## 🎯 Strategy Prompts

**Location**: [strategy/](strategy/)

Strategic planning, evaluation, and decision-making prompts:

- **[ai-vendor-evaluation/](strategy/ai-vendor-evaluation/)** - Systematic framework for evaluating AI vendors, tools, and platforms with vendor-neutral analysis.

---

## 🛠️ Utilities

**Location**: [utilities/](utilities/)

Productivity tools and automation utilities:

- **[@giftfinder](utilities/giftfinder-shopping-assistant.md)** - Intelligent gift discovery assistant with recipient profiling, web search, and organized tracking for thoughtful gift-giving.
- **[excel-automation/](utilities/excel-automation/)** - Automate Excel spreadsheet creation, data manipulation, and formula generation.
- **[excel-editing/](utilities/excel-editing/)** - Expert assistance for editing existing Excel files, creating pivot tables, and advanced Excel features.

---

---

## 🚀 Usage Guidelines

### Using Prompts in Claude Code

Reference prompts using the @-mention syntax with mnemonics:
```
@architect help me design a data architecture
@tutor create a learning plan for Python
@giftfinder help me find a gift for my friend
```

Or reference the full path:
```
@ai-resources/prompts/documentation/arcdoc-documentation-architect.md review my docs
```

### Creating New Prompts

1. Use [@meta](meta/meta-prompt-engineer.md) to create high-quality prompts with systematic evaluation
2. Place prompts in the appropriate category folder
3. Update this README catalog when adding new prompts
4. Use consistent frontmatter with title, author, version, tags

### Prompt Maintenance

- **Versioning**: Update version numbers in frontmatter when making significant changes
- **Documentation**: Keep this README updated with new prompts
- **Organization**: Keep prompts organized by category for easy discovery

---

## 📊 Quick Reference

| Category | Count | Use Case |
|----------|-------|----------|
| Architecture | 3 | Technical design, Data Vault, diagrams, requirements |
| Documentation | 4 | Project docs, business rules, meeting notes |
| Meta | 7 | Navigation/routing, prompt engineering, library management, patterns, agentic development, unified architect |
| Career | 20 | Career planning, AI roles, job search, resume building |
| Workflows | 4 | Multi-step processes (slide decks) |
| Specialized | 1 | Domain utilities (tutoring) |
| Development | 1 | Coding assistance, clean code practices |
| Strategy | 1 | Vendor evaluation, strategic planning |
| Utilities | 3 | Excel automation, gift shopping, productivity tools |
| **Total** | **44** | Centralized general-purpose prompts |

---

## 🔗 Related Resources

- **Configuration**: [.ai/instructions.md](../../.ai/instructions.md) - Customize with your personal context
- **Additional Context**: [.ai/context.md](../../.ai/context.md) - Optional domain-specific context
- **Skills**: [ai-resources/skills/](../skills/) - Packaged skill files

---

*Last Updated: 2025-10-25 by Dan Brickey*
*Version v2.5.0: Added @nav Navigator for intelligent routing to prompts/docs/workflows - your entry point to the AI resources ecosystem*
